Thank you very much.
Um well, I would like to start with
testicles.
Men who sleep 5 hours a night have
significantly smaller testicles than
those who sleep 7 hours or more.
In addition, men who routinely sleep
just 4 to 5 hours a night will have a
level of testosterone which is that of
someone 10 years their senior.
So a lack of sleep will age a man by a
decade in terms of that critical aspect
of wellness.
And we see equivalent impairments in
female reproductive health caused by a
lack of sleep.
This is the best news that I have for
you today.
From this point, it may only get worse.
Not only will I tell you about the
wonderfully good things that happen when
you get sleep, but the alarmingly bad
things that happen when you don't get
enough.
Both for your brain and for your body.
Um let me start with the brain and the
functions of learning and memory.
Because what we've discovered over the
past 10 or so years is that you need
sleep after learning to essentially hit
the save button on those new memories so
that you don't forget.
But recently we discovered that you also
need sleep before learning.
And now to actually prepare your brain.
Um almost like a dry sponge ready to
initially soak up new information.
And without sleep, the memory circuits
of the brain essentially become
waterlogged as it were and you can't
absorb new memories.
So let me show you the data. Um here in
this study, we decided to test the
hypothesis that pulling the all-nighter
was a good idea.
So we took a group of uh individuals and
we assigned them to one of two
experimental groups, a sleep group and a
sleep deprivation group.
Now the sleep group, they're going to
get a full 8 hours of slumber.
But the deprivation group, we're going
to keep them awake in the laboratory
under full supervision.
Um there's no naps or caffeine by the
way, so it's miserable for everyone
involved. And then the next day we're
going to place those participants inside
an MRI scanner.
And we're going to have them try and
learn a whole list of new facts as we're
taking snapshots of brain activity.
And then we're going to test them
to see how effective that learning has
been.
And that's what you're looking at here
on the vertical axis.
And when you put those two groups head
to head, what you find is a quite
significant 40% deficit in the ability
of the brain to make new memories
without sleep.
I think this should be concerning
considering what we know is happening to
sleep in our education populations right
now.
In fact, to put that in context, it
would be the difference in a child acing
an exam versus failing it miserably.
40%.
And we've gone on to discover what goes
wrong within your brain to produce these
types of learning disabilities.
And there's a structure that sits on the
left and the right side of your brain
called the hippocampus.
And you can think of the hippocampus
almost like the informational inbox of
your brain.
It's very good at receiving new memory
files and then holding on to them.
And when you look at the structure in
those people who'd had a full night of
sleep, we saw lots of healthy learning
related activity.
Yet in those people who were sleep
deprived,
we actually couldn't find any
significant signal whatsoever.
So it's almost as though sleep
deprivation had shut down your memory
inbox and any new incoming files, they
were just being bounced.
You couldn't effectively commit new
experiences to memory.
So that's the bad that can happen if I
were to take sleep away from you, but
let me just come back to that control
group for a second.
Do you remember those folks that got a
full 8 hours of sleep?
Well, we can ask a very different
question.
What is it about the physiological
quality of your sleep when you do get it
that restores and enhances your memory
and learning ability each and every day?
And by placing electrodes all over the
head, what we've discovered is that
there are big, powerful brain waves that
happen during the very deepest stages of
sleep that have riding on top of them
these spectacular bursts of electrical
activity that we call sleep spindles.
And it's the combined quality of these
deep sleep brain waves that acts like a
file transfer mechanism at night
shifting memories from a short-term
vulnerable reservoir to a more permanent
long-term storage site within the brain
and therefore protecting them,
making them safe.
And it is important that we understand
what during sleep actually transacts
these memory benefits.
Because there are real medical and
societal implications.
And let me just tell you about one area
that we've moved this work out into
clinically, which is the context of
aging and dementia.
Because it's of course no secret that as
we get older, our learning and memory
abilities begin to fade and decline.
But what we've also discovered is that a
physiological signature of aging
is that your sleep gets worse.
Especially that deep quality of sleep
that I was just discussing.
And only last year we finally published
evidence that these two things, they're
not simply co-occurring, they are
significantly interrelated.
And it suggests that the disruption of
deep sleep is an underappreciated factor
that is contributing to cognitive
decline or memory decline in aging and
most recently we've discovered in
Alzheimer's disease as well.
Now I know this is remarkably depressing
news. Um it's in the mail, it's coming
at you.
But there's a potential silver lining
here.
Unlike many of the other factors that we
know are associated with aging.
Um for example, changes in the physical
structure of the brain, that's
fiendishly difficult to treat.
But that sleep is a missing piece in the
explanatory puzzle of aging and
Alzheimer's is exciting because we may
be able to do something about it.
And one way that we are approaching this
um at my sleep center is not by using
sleeping pills by the way.
Unfortunately, they are blunt
instruments that do not produce
naturalistic sleep.
Instead, we're actually developing a
method based on this. It's called direct
current brain stimulation. You insert a
small amount of voltage into the brain,
so small you typically don't feel it,
but it has a measurable impact.
Now if you apply this stimulation during
sleep in young, healthy adults,
um as if you're sort of singing in time
with those deep sleep brain waves, not
only can you amplify the size of those
deep sleep brain waves, but in doing so,
we can almost double the amount of
memory benefit that you get from sleep.
The question now is whether we can
translate this same affordable,
potentially portable piece of technology
into older adults and those with
dementia.
Can we restore back some healthy quality
of deep sleep and in doing so, can we
salvage aspects of their learning and
memory function? That is my real hope
now.
That's one of our moonshot goals as it
were.
So that's an example of sleep for your
brain, but sleep is just as essential
for your body.
And we've already spoken about sleep
loss and your reproductive system.
Or I could tell you about sleep loss and
your cardiovascular system.
And that all it takes is 1 hour.
Because there is a global experiment
performed on 1.6 billion people across
70 countries twice a year
and it's called daylight savings time.
Now in the spring when we lose 1 hour of
sleep, we see a subsequent 24%
increase in heart attacks that following
day.
In the autumn,
when we gain an hour of sleep, we see a
21% reduction in heart attacks.
Isn't that incredible?
And you see exactly the same profile for
car crashes, road traffic accidents,
even suicide rates.
But as a deeper dive, I want to focus on
this, sleep loss and your immune system.
And here I'll introduce these delightful
blue elements in the image. They are
called natural killer cells.
And you can think of natural killer
cells almost like the secret service
agents of your immune system. And they
are very good at identifying dangerous
unwanted elements and eliminating them.
In fact, what they're doing here is
destroying a cancerous tumor mass.
So what you wish for is a virile set of
these immune assassins at all times.
And tragically, that's what you don't
have if you're not sleeping enough.
So here in this experiment, you're not
going to have your sleep deprived for an
entire night. You're simply going to
have your sleep restricted to 4 hours
for one single night. And then we're
going to look to see what's the percent
reduction in immune cell activity that
you suffer.
And it's not small. It's not 10%. It's
not 20%.
There was a 70% drop in natural killer
cell activity.
That's a concerning state of immune
deficiency.
And you can perhaps understand why we're
now finding significant links between
short sleep duration and your risk for
the development of numerous forms of
cancer.
Currently, that list includes cancer of
the bowel, cancer of the prostate, and
cancer of the breast.
In fact, the link between a lack of
sleep and cancer is now so strong that
the World Health Organization has
classified any form of nighttime shift
work as a probable carcinogen
because of a disruption of your
sleep-wake rhythms.
So you may have heard of that old maxim
that you can sleep when you're dead.
Well, I'm being quite serious now. It is
mortally unwise advice.
We know this from epidemiological
studies across millions of individuals.
There's a simple truth.
The shorter your sleep, the shorter your
life.
Short sleep predicts all-cause
mortality.
And if increasing your risk for the
development of cancer or even
Alzheimer's disease were not
sufficiently
and disquieting,
we have since discovered that a lack of
sleep will even erode the very fabric of
biological life itself.
Your DNA genetic code.
So here in this study, they took a group
of healthy adults and they limited them
to 6 hours of sleep a night for 1 week.
And then they measured the change in
their gene activity profile relative to
when those same individuals were getting
a full 8 hours of sleep a night.
And there were two critical findings.
First, a sizeable and significant 711
genes were distorted in their activity
caused by a lack of sleep.
The second result was that about half of
those genes were actually increased in
their activity. The other half were
decreased.
Now, those genes that were switched off
by a lack of sleep were genes associated
with your immune system.
So once again, you can see that immune
deficiency.
In contrast, those genes that were
actually upregulated or increased by way
of a lack of sleep were genes associated
with the promotion of tumors,
genes associated with long-term chronic
inflammation within the body,
and genes associated with stress and as
a consequence, cardiovascular disease.
There is simply no aspect of your
wellness that can retreat at the sign of
sleep deprivation and get away
unscathed.
It's rather like a broken water pipe in
your home. Sleep loss will leak down
into every nook and cranny of your
physiology.
Even tampering with the very DNA nucleic
alphabet that spells out your daily
health narrative.
And at this point, you may be thinking,
"My goodness, how do I start to get
better sleep? What are your tips for
good sleep?" Well,
beyond avoiding the damaging and harmful
impact of alcohol and caffeine on sleep,
and if you're struggling with sleep at
night, avoiding naps during the day, I
have two pieces of advice for you.
The first is regularity.
Go to bed at the same time, wake up at
the same time, no matter whether it's
the weekday or the weekend. Regularity
is king, and it will anchor your sleep
and improve the quantity and the quality
of that sleep.
The second is keep it cool.
Your body needs to drop its core
temperature by about 2 to 3 Fahrenheit
to initiate sleep and then to stay
asleep.
And it's the reason you will always find
it easier to fall asleep in a room
that's too cold than too hot.
So aim for a bedroom temperature of
around 65 or about 18 C.
That's going to be optimal for the sleep
of most people.
And then finally, in taking a step back
then,
what is the mission-critical statement
here?
Well, I think it may be this.
Sleep, unfortunately, is not an optional
lifestyle luxury.
Sleep is a non-negotiable
biological necessity.
It is your life support system.
And it is Mother Nature's best effort
yet at immortality.
And the decimation of sleep throughout
industrialized nations is having a
catastrophic impact on our health, our
wellness,
even the safety and the education of our
children.
It's a silent sleep loss epidemic, and
it is fast becoming one of the greatest
public health challenges that we face in
the 21st century.
I believe it is now time for us to
reclaim our right to a full night of
sleep.
And without embarrassment
or that unfortunate stigma of laziness.
And in doing so, we can be reunited with
the most powerful elixir of life.
The Swiss Army knife of health, as it
were.
And with that soapbox rant over, I will
simply say good night, good luck, and
above all,
I do hope you sleep well.
Thank you very much indeed.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
No, no, no. Stay there for a second.
Good job not running away, though. I
appreciate that. So that was terrifying.
You're welcome. Yes, thank you. Thank
you.
Um
Since we can't catch up on sleep,
what are we supposed to do? What do we
do when we're like tossing and turning
in bed late at night or doing shift work
or or whatever else? So you're right, we
can't catch up on sleep. Sleep is not
like the bank. You can't accumulate a
debt and then hope to pay it off at a
later point in time. Um I should also
note the reason that it's so
catastrophic is that our health
deteriorate so quickly. First is because
human beings are the only species that
deliberately deprive themselves of sleep
for no apparent reason.
Cuz we're smart. And well, and and I
make that point because what it means is
that Mother Nature, throughout the
course of evolution, has never had to
face the challenge of this thing called
sleep deprivation.
So she's never developed a safety net.
And that's why when you under sleep,
things just sort of implode so quickly
both within the brain and the body. So
you just have to
prioritize. Okay. So but tossing and
turning in bed, what do I do?
So if you are staying in bed awake for
too long, you should get out of bed and
go to a different room and do something
different. The reason is because your
brain will very quickly associate your
bedroom with the place of wakefulness.
And you need to break that association.
So only return to bed when you are
sleepy, and that way you will relearn
the association that you once had, which
is your bed is the place of sleep. So
the analogy would be you'd never sit at
the dinner table waiting to get hungry.
So why would you lie in bed waiting to
get sleepy?
All right. Well, thank you for that
wake-up call. Great job, Matt.
You're very welcome. Thank you very
much.